Overview
========

There are three central concepts in React Forms â€” form schemas, form components
and input components.

Form Schemas
------------

Form schemas are high level declarative descriptions of how forms should
operate: what's shape of the data form should handle, how to render any specific
field, how to validate user input, what are the default values and so on.

Form schemas don't do anything by themselves they are just metadata and are
subject to interpretation by form components (see :ref:`form-components`) of
React Forms library.

A basic example of a form schema looks like::

  function Person(props) {
    return Mapping(props,
      Scalar({name: 'first', label: 'First name'}),
      Scalar({name: 'last', label: 'Last name'}))
  }

  var family = Mapping(
    Person({name: 'mother', label: 'Mother'}),
    Person({name: 'father', label: 'Father'}),
    List({name: 'children'}, Person()))

You can read more about schemas on :doc:`schema` documentation page.

.. _form-components:

Form Components
---------------

Form components are React components which interpret form schemas to render form
UI and handle validation and data flow. They are designed to be as generic as
possible and so to be reusable across as many form schemas as possible.

There are four types of form components, each for different schema type and one
component which serves as a form controller: ``<Form />``, ``<Field />``,
``<Fieldset />`` and ``<RepeatingFieldset />``.

The functional scope of form components is to decide where to render ``<label
/>`` elements, when to show hide any specific field, how to handle array values
and so on. What falls outside of this is how users enter form values, this is
handled by input components (see :ref:`input-components`) instead.

``<Form />`` component is the only stateful component provided by React Forms.
It serves as a form controller, holds form value and validation state and
updates it accordingly. Every change made by user through an input component is
propagated up to the form component.

``<Field />`` component is used to represent scalar values (strings, numbers,
dates and so on), values which correspond to schema nodes of type ``Scalar``.
This component renders input component and corresponding ``<label>`` component
with field label and hint text.

``<Fieldset />`` component is used to render objects, values which correspond to
schema nodes of type ``Mapping``.

``<RepeatingFieldset />`` is used to render values which corresponds to ``List``
schema nodes. It renders a form component for each item in a value and also
provides controls to create a new item and to remove existent items.

.. _input-components:

Input Components
----------------

Input components are React components which handle user input of form values.
At a basic level these are ``<input />`` components. But one can develop custom
ones as datepickers, WYSIWYG editors and so on. Technically input components are
reusable outside of React Forms context and are typical components which conform
to "value/onChange" contract.

Dataflow
--------

``<Form />`` component holds entire form value and validation structure as its
state. This is the only stateful component in React Forms.

Each of form elements (fields, fieldsets, repeating fieldsets) receive a cursor
to form value and validation state through ``value`` property.

When user interacts with the form through the input component the corresponding
form element **creates a new copy** of form value and validation state and
notifies form via callback.

Thus React Forms guarantees that the entire form state is accessible from a
single location and is immutable. That enables such complex functionality as
undo/redo to be implemented in about 50 LOC, see the :doc:`examples/undo`.
